We'd like for you to make some comments, if you
would please, on what George McGinney did in
ecology.
George McGinney was, I believe, one of the first
pure scientist marine ecologists in the world. I
think that Peterson in Denmark was certainly an
ecologist, but he was motivated by fishery
concerns and did some very nice work. But George
McGinnity, who is still alive, I heard just the
other day, did
some very nice work on the ecology of some of our
estuarine conditions in California and on the
West Coast in general. He tried to bring together
all of the environmental factors, including the
biological, that were controlling
the ecosystems, although he did not call them
ecosystems, in these estuarine areas. for the
first time, and I think that he had a grasp of this
that was admirable in his time. He doesn't fare
well now because of the fact that things have
progressed on into systems analysis and so on, and
he had no respect for the attempts of biologists to
become engineers. So he's not as well received now
as he was in the past. But he was a pioneer, I would
say, in his field. You know where he lives now? I am
not certain. I surmise it is in Puget Sound region
somewhere. I would say possibly. in the Friday
Harbor region. His wife, Nettie McGinnity, they
have published together. They've put out two or
three books. So he is a real pioneer and would be, if
he could be located, oh, Joel Hedgepath would know
where he is. Just ask Joel, and you might want to
give him a call or something. This is a quote,
really. There was a good deal of dissension in the
department and a resistance to merging the
disciplines. Was there the same sort of problems
at Scripps when Scripps was created, dissension
in the department and merging of disciplines to
create a department of oceanography?
I've forgotten the context of this now. Actually,
you're talking about what I suspect is political
infighting here at Texas A&M concerning a
disagreement over exactly how the structure or
role of oceanography should play in the creating
of an academic discipline.
Yeah. However, right today, that doesn't ring the
soapbox response that I might have given. I don't
really know. just what we're talking about on the
infighting. Well, what we're really concerned
about is that when you create a discipline of
oceanography, something that's really you can't
create, I suspect, but when you do this and you
begin to merge the disciplines and have
overlapping responsibilities in terms of
academicians, is this a constant problem
wherever you've been, at Scripps, at NYU, here at
A&M, or is this unusual to occur? No, I had best
demur on that. I really can't come up with the lead.
Maybe it'll come out in a moment. But right at the
moment, I don't really see. Now, there were some
squabblings going on among representatives of
the disciplines. And clearly, there's always
been the feeling that physical oceanography was
the real oceanography, that the other things were
simply tacked on in order to round out a curriculum
to give enough for a degree program. And possibly
this is the kind of thing I had in the back of my mind.
I know this has been true. But invariably, so far as
I am aware, the biologists have always won out. And
the reason they've won out is that the others have
come to them eventually with something that
interests them about their field that applies to
biology. And I don't say that with any feeling of
superiority, but really truthfully so. I'm
making up a proposal right now to discuss the
potential of disposal of dredge material in the
open ocean and what effects it's going to have.
Okay, I have brought in a chemical oceanographer,
and the reason I brought this one in is that he
became very interested in biological phenomena
in relationship to the transfer of trace metals in
the marine environment. I brought in a physical
oceanographer because he's particularly
interested in the relationship of currents to
biological phenomena in the sea, and so am I. These
people have expressed this interest on their own.
I have not motivated it, but because of this, I find
a pleasant working liaison among these parts of
the discipline. And at the same time, geology is
clearly interrelated with my feeling about the
need to understand that and the distribution of
bottom organisms. So I think, as is originally
espoused, by Roger Revelle and his colleagues,
cohorts, and so on. The real oceanography was the
physical. And these others just were added on to
justify giving a curriculum.
So there could be a little battle around there. And
it still goes on at A&M a little bit. But it's not
serious. The most serious thing is we can't find a
department
head. Listen, we just got through with that. You
did? Yes. I'm interested in... You'll have to
explain that later. I'm interested in your
academia, UCLA, Pomona, Chicago, Caltech,
Sunny, A&M, your work for the vitamin company,
Terrico, government, quasi-government, NSF.
Has there been a deliberate attempt in your life to
mix all of these together, or has one just sort of
led to another? I mean, have you tried to broaden
yourself outside of the academic world to include
all of these, or did you just do that accidentally?
No, not entirely accidentally. I have... been my
worst enemy in many ways because I have gone where
my interests have taken me and have not adhered to a
single line which would have perhaps made me much
more acceptable in the public eye but I have often
taken the unpopular side of things and it is
because I feel that that the scientist does have an
obligation to translate his findings into useful
information for the public. And the public
includes here anybody that's not a scientist. And
indeed, it includes anybody that's not a
scientist in his field. And so I have felt that it
was not only, in a sense, an obligation of the
scientist to provide the basis for the technology
that made products that society wanted, but it was
also necessary for the scientists to attempt to
find ways to solve the problems of the byproducts
of these things that were dangerous to the
environment. And so all the way through, I have
tried not to condemn what industry was doing, say,
to the marine environment so much as to find ways to
solve the problem to make what they were doing less
damaging to the marine environment. And so it has
been with most of the endeavors that I've
undertaken. Now, I like new challenges. And in
part, that was the reason I was attracted when
Robert Maynard Hutchins gave me an invitation to
go to Chicago, to go there. But as I told you before,
my somatic self couldn't keep up with my
intellectual self, and I couldn't stand the damn
winters. So I left there, and When I was at NSF,
I
was approached by the new president of a new
university forming, State University of New
York, which was then at Oyster Bay and was moving to
Stony Brook. And he outlined such a fantastically
interesting development that I went there for
that challenge. But as I say, when I saw it was a
political morass, I left. It was a very
disappointing short endeavor. Caltech was a
tremendous opportunity for me because it
permitted me to be at a marine laboratory, a very
small but very well run and very well kept up marine
laboratory at Krona Del Mar, California. And so I
went there for that reason. And Pomona was a very
difficult intellectual area
to leave because it was really a delightful
experience. I should have left 10 years before I
did, because one does not develop in this field as
well there as you can in other areas. And I perhaps
stayed too long there. But it was a pleasant place.
Environmentally, it became unsound. I feel sorry
for people that have to live in that smog out there
east of Los Angeles today. So I guess that kind of
explains it. It's a long way around. I don't think
you ever exactly said why the president of Stony
Brook was fired. I don't really know. I don't
really know, and that was part of it. It was, I
think, because of fright on the part of those that
had been there that he was attempting to make too
many changes too fast, and they felt insecure. And
they began to find ways and means of trapping him
into saying things that were not acceptable to
some of the board of directors, I guess they called
it there. But that is the only thing that I know.
He's
in the Washington area somewhere now. I've sort of
lost track of him. But he was an exciting person.
speaker, and he was a statistical
thermodynamicist and was really well trained.
And he had a tremendous interest in engineering
and biology. He was a fascinating individual. I
think Stony Brook would have gone well beyond
where it did in the early days. It was held up a long
time because of that. But it got some good men later
on, of course. to direct it. Really good people. So
it caught up. It's one of the great schools now, I
think. In discussing the Carnegie Conference,
you stated that you were chosen to lead the
symposium largely because of certain things that
I had done, pre-medical education, and that sort
of thing. Yeah. What pre-medical education?
Following the Second World War, there was a
resurgent interest in medicine. And as a
consequence of this, there was a demand for
high-quality students. And Pomona certainly had
high-quality students. And yet, it was sometimes
difficult for these students to be evaluated
properly from a small college as compared to those
who came from the university scene. As a
consequence of this, I tried to devise ways that we
could convey rather accurately the worth of a
student beyond the simple medical aptitude test
and so on that they took, and to at least
preliminarily screen them so that they would be
eligible for interview by deans or assistant
deans of the medical schools. And we wanted to get
them into the best of the medical schools. As a
consequence, I began to attend national
conferences on this pre-medical education and
then devised ways and means of dealing with the
students, of preparing necessary
recommendations and so on, and got caught up in
this so that I was actually invited to sit on the
admissions committee of the University of
Southern California Medical School. And
I was really quite intrigued by that. I had
considered going into medicine myself, and so I
was intrigued by it. I don't know whether I
answered your question or not. Now, you also
mentioned some work in agriculture that you did,
some education in agriculture, and I could
not—you
said that when you—one of the earliest people to be
educated in this sort of specialization of— Oh.
No, I think perhaps at Berkeley, was it? At
Berkeley. No, it turned out that a lot of the
courses that I wanted to take were given in the
College of Agriculture, including soil science,
which was really a going thing when I was going to
college. And so I moved through a series of
colleges, actually, while at Berkeley in a very
short period of time. And took a lot of courses
there in genetics, for example, that are still
here given in agriculture. But I really am not sure
of the context. I should have read my notes over.
No, that's fine. You also mentioned something
called, is it Fraber Shrimpers? F-R-A-B-E-R?
Fraber Shrimpers? Mm-hmm. Do you know? I didn't
know. That's what I got from the interview all the
time. It didn't make any sense to me. Well, I
listened to the tape. It had to do with... You don't
know anything about the context, eh? You were just
talking about the sort of... one particular sort
of vessel that appeared. And it sounded as if the
word you used was freighter-shrimpers. Or
freighter, maybe. Or maybe it was a
freighter-shrimper.
Oh. This wasn't in regard to the... to the
Alaminos, was it? It was? Well, that was an FS. It
was an Army FS class freighter. It was a modified FS
freighter. That was a class of ships that the Army
ran during the Second World War, and I believe that
must be what that was. That's correct. FS class.
That was puzzling. Right. Now, I want to ask one
question hinted at in this first interview
concerning women and discrimination in science.
Does it seem to you that women entering the
scientific field face discrimination based upon
sex? If you're talking about science generally, i
would have to say yes i think so not much doubt in my
mind i think this is somewhat regional and i think
it is somewhat related to school size and so on i i
feel that in the undergraduate level no but at the
graduate level yes and i think uh particularly
among people of my age that have been
disillusioned by having students go through and
then take a degree and do nothing more with it. But
that's passing, for sure, because women aren't
doing that to the same extent anymore. So I think
that thing is gone. In oceanography, even yet
today, there is genuine... discrimination in
some ways, that we accept girls and so on, but
there's always that latent feeling that there's
such a nuisance on board ship and that sort of
thing, you know, so you do get it. I think that this
is passing without much doubt, but certainly some
that have not been as many women leaders in science
as there perhaps should have been.
For the reason that they were discouraged at some
point. Now, we have a series of sort of
semi-technical questions that I'd like for Monty
to ask you concerning some attitudes towards
science that you have. One of the questions I have
is, in the first interview you talked about
analytical specialism. time you're going to
university it was in sway but by the uh by the 40s the
people began to realize that the analytical this
is a quote analytical approach to science was no
longer going to work now i'm not sure i understand
what you mean by that isn't the scientific method
necessarily analytical would you perhaps you
better define and then explain how it isn't going
to work and why well it's kind of difficult for you
to understand that today because the same feeling
really doesn't hold. We talk about analysis and
synthesis today and use them very freely and so on,
but if you look at it over a long horizon of time, you
realize that man's mind was searching for the
ultimate answer to what life is all about and what
is life, and as a consequence it was Wouldn't it be
the natural thing to pull things apart, to look
inside? After the medieval period, this
certainly was true. Instead of talking about it,
you looked at it. And of course, in the Grecian
period, they had done the same thing. They had
looked at it, but a lot of that stuff got lost.
Although that seems like an ancient historical
view of analysis, this was the analytical
approach. And we became enamored with what? Going
first into molecules, and then into submolecular
parts, and then into subatomic parts.
It became evident as we got into that stage that
this was beyond life, or so it seemed. And thus,
there was the synthesis that seemed to be
necessary. Now, the same thing was true of
evolutionary concepts, sort of pulling things
apart and examining pieces, or as there came out
books in the late 40s in particular that began to
talk about, well, one was titled Evolution, the
Modern Synthesis, of pulling facts together into
a coherent sort of thing. So you've got then to say,
yes, analysis is still an important part,
analytical approach, sure.
The thing that we keep stressing, in fact,
everything we write around here, for example, we
look at factor trains and systems analysis and
this sort of stuff. But what we're coming back to is
putting it together to make it a coherent
intellectual thought.